This film is a recording of a live performance from 1983 at the Centro de Bellas Artes in San Juan, Puerto Rico. It explores Puerto Rico’s tri‑ethnic heritage and features multiple Indigenous musical genres, including bomba, plena, and danza. The performance includes renowned artists such as Don Rafael Cepeda and Petra Cepeda.
They were unaware of Europe’s existence. They did not know the white man, with his thick mustache, long beard, and hairy chest. When they saw them, they wondered who these strange beings with different customs were. The language they spoke was very different from the Spanish we speak today, although some of their words are still used in our daily conversations.
Narrator: The Taínos took advantage of any occasion to celebrate an important event. For example, that is what the areitos were for. During these gatherings, they sang and danced. At that time, more than 70,000 Taínos were living happily on our island. They grew their own food, had their own language, symbols, and way of life. Although the Spaniards may have mistaken their kindness for simplicity, the Taíno people were an advanced civilization, with a free social structure in which they cared for one another without displacement. But the Spanish drive for conquest—fueled by the search for new lands and the desire for gold—forced them into labor. Faced with this situation, they rebelled; they fought. They defended, with their lives, the land that saw them born. This land called Borikén.
Restless. Daring. That is what those white men who colonized our island were like. They claim to have “discovered” Puerto Rico in 1493… The truth is that Puerto Rico was already inhabited. But it was not until fifteen years later that formal colonization by Spain began. In 1508, a Spanish hidalgo, Juan Ponce de León, came to explore the island and learn about its conditions. He heard news of gold in Borikén. He saw an opportunity to enrich himself, to cover himself in glory by adding territory to the Spanish Empire, and to fulfill God’s will by converting souls to Christianity… reasons that fueled his interest in colonizing the island.
Throughout our history, the Black population carried the weight of labor.  They cleared the fields, plowed the land, and planted the coastal valleys… with the seed of sugar. Knowing this arduous and hostile process of the sugar plantations makes it easier to understand the importance of religion, cultural life, and the customs of Black Puerto Ricans. If we do not understand this essential fact, we will never grasp their other contributions—such as their imprint on our ethnic formation and their cultural integration into our society. For all these reasons, we must emphasize that sugar and Black slavery were synonymous throughout our history.
There was a shift during this period. Black labor became concentrated in coffee cultivation, which was not very successful. Then, Queen Sugar displaced the rich bean, and once again Black hands became responsible for Puerto Rico’s economic development.
Scene 3: The African
Years later, with the arrival of the African, exploitation became a reality—not of mines, but of fertile land. Once settled on the island, aspects of their culture were integrated, including music, language, and religion, which arrived with European monks, filling the island with Spanish civilization.
Interlude: Slavery. For centuries, the inhabitants of Africa lived on the island in a state of inferiority. Subjugated by their masters, enslaved in degrading tasks, their dignity trampled. Nevertheless, Black people participated in the fertile life of Puerto Rico and contributed beautiful elements to the culture of the country. Although all of this is true, we often forget the most important contribution of Black people: their labor.
Narrator:
Throughout our history, Black people carried the weight of labor. They cleared the fields, plowed the land, and planted the coastal valleys with the seed of sugar. Understanding this arduous and hostile process of the sugar plantations makes it easier for us to grasp the importance of religion, cultural life, and the customs of Black Puerto Ricans. If we do not understand this essential fact, we will never comprehend their other contributions—such as their imprint on our ethnic formation and their cultural integration into our society. For all these reasons, we must emphasize that sugar and Black slavery were synonymous throughout our history.
Over time, there was a shift. Black labor became concentrated in coffee cultivation, which was not very successful. Then Queen Sugar displaced the rich bean, and once again Black hands became responsible for Puerto Rico’s economic development. The contribution of Black people to Puerto Rican society was especially significant in the second half of the 19th century. In 1873, when the number of enslaved people had already been reduced to a minority, the Spanish courts proclaimed: Abolition of slavery!
Chorus
Colony, colony, take the sugarcane to the mill.
Verses
Do not let the poor die of hunger;
they receive their wages
on the plantation where they are dying.
If we have the cane, let us earn our sustenance;
I beg you, give the workers their place.
If on Sunday they carry cane to the mill,
all the poor go without remedy.
If we do not have the cane, there is no sustenance.
I beg you, give work to those who prepare their own livelihood.
Narrator: Ignoraban la existencia de Europa. No conocían al hombre blanco, de espesos bigotes, largas barbas y velludo pecho. Al verlos, se preguntaban quiénes eran estos seres extraños con costumbres diferentes. El idioma que hablaban era muy diferente al espanol que hablamos hoy. Aunque algunas palabras aún usamos en nuestras conversaciones diarias.
Los taínos aprovechan cualquier ocasión para celebrar algún acontecimiento. Por ejemplo, de esto eran los areitos. Durante los mismos, cantaban y bailaban. Para aquel entonces, había más de 70,000 taínos viviendo felizmente en nuestra isla. Sembraban su propia comida, tenían su propia lengua, símbolos y manera de vivir. Aunque tal vez los españoles confundían su benevolencia con simpleza, la raza taína era una civilización avanzada, con una estructura social libre en donde se cuidaban unos a los otros sin desplazamiento. Pero el afán de conquista español, movilizado por descubrir tierras y adquirir oro, los sometió al trabajo forzoso. Ante esta situación, se rebelan, ¡luchan! Defienden con su vida la tierra que los vio nacer. Esta tierra llamada: Borikén.
Inquietos. Audaces. Así eran aquellos hombres blancos colonizadores de nuestra isla. Ellos dicen haber descubierto a Puerto Rico en el 1493 ... La realidad es que ya Puerto Rico estaba habitado. Pero no es hasta 15 años más tarde cuando se inicia la colonización formal por España. En 1508, Un hidalgo español: Juan Ponce de León, vino a explorarla y enterarse de sus condiciones. Oyó noticias sobre el oro en Borikén. Vio oportunidad para enriquecerse, cubrirse de gloria añadiendo territorio al imperio Español, y cumpliendo con Dios al convertir almas al cristianismo ... razones que tuvo para interesarse en la colonización de la isla. vavés de nuestra hilstoria, el negro cargó con el peso del trabajo. Desmontaba los campos, Haraba la tierra sembraba los valles costeros ..... con la semilla del azúcar. Conociendo este proceso arduo y hostil, de las haciendas azucaceras. Se nos hace mas fácil comprender la trascendencia de la religión, la vida cultural y las costumbres del negro puertorriqueño. Si no comprendemos este importante hecho jamás entenderemos otras contribuciones. Como su huella en la formación étnica y su integración cultural en nuestra sociedad. Por todo esto tenemos que acentuar, que azúcar y esclavitud negra fueron sinónimos ..... a través de nuestra historia. Hubo un cambio en la trayectoria de este tiempo. Se encontraba el negro concentrado en el cultivo del café, lo cual no fue muy satisfactorio. Entonces, la reina azúcar desplaza el rico grano y nuevamente las manos del negro son la responsables del desarrollo económico de Puerto Rico. Scene 3: El Africano Años después, con la llegada del africano, se hizo realidad la explotación, no ya de minas, sino de tierra fertil. Una vez instalados en la isla se integraron aspectos de su cultura que incluía: música, idioma, y religión cual llegó con monjes europeos. Llenando la isla con su civilización española. Interlude: Esclavitud Durante siglos, los habitantes de África vivieron en la isla en estado de inferioridad. Sometidos por sus amos, esclavizados en tareas denigrantes, pisoteados en su dignidad. No obstante, el negro participó en la vida fértil del puertorriqueño, y aportó hermosos elementos a la cultura del país. Aunque todo esto es correcto, olvidamos la más importante contribución del negro. El Trabajo!
A través de nuestra hilstoria, el negro cargó con el peso del trabajo. Desmontaba los campos, Haraba la tierra sembraba los valles costeros con la semilla del azúcar. Conociendo este proceso arduo y hostil, de las haciendas azucaceras. Se nos hace mas fácil comprender la trascendencia de la religión, la vida cultural y las costumbres del negro puertorriqueño. Si no comprendemos este importante hecho jamás entenderemos otras contribuciones. Como su huella en la formación étnica y su integración cultural en nuestra sociedad. Por todo esto tenemos que acentuar, que azúcar y esclavitud negra fueron sinónimos. A través de nuestra historia hubo un cambio en la trayectoria de este tiempo. Se encontraba el negro concentrado en el cultivo del café, lo cual no fue muy satisfactorio. Entonces, la reina azúcar desplaza el rico grano y nuevamente las manos del negro son la responsables del desarrollo económico de Puerto Rico. La contribución del negro en la sociedad puertorriqueña ha sido muy significativa segunda mitad del siglo 19. En 1873, cuando el número de esclavos se habla reducido a una minoría las cortes de España proclamaron: Abolición de la esclavitud!
Scene 5: La Fusión
La tierra y el hombre se compenetran. Se configuran mutuamente. Las razas se fusionaron en nuestra isla. De esta amalgama racial nace el proceso de cruces. Mezcla de diversas razas que poblaron la isla. Debido precisamente a la fusión de estas razas Puerto Rico, fue fundando una sola...... EL PUERTORRIQUEÑO.   Uno de los progenitores de nuestro pueblo fue: el indio aborigen, el español conquistador, y el negro africano que trabaja en les para ganarse el pan de cada dia.
Narrador: El relato anterior es un compendio de las escenas que van a vivir:
estampa del puertorriqueño que trabaja en los cañaverales para ganarse el pan de cada día.
reso, la historia se desarrolla en un cañaveral. Cosecha de la caña, fabricación de la azúcar. Esto es Zafra!
"Colonia" Don Rafael Cepeda AtilesCoro  Colonia, colonia, lleva la caña al ingenio.Colonia, colonia, lleva la caña al ingenio.Versos  No dejes morir de hambre a los pobres obrerosTe reciben sus salarios en la hacienda donde están muriendo.Si la caña no tenemos, con que gana su sustento?Te lo suplico, coloca, que prepara a los obrerosSi el domingo lleva caña para el ingenio, pa' todos de los pobres sin remedio.Si la caña no tenemos, con que gana su sustento?Te lo suplico coloco que prepara su sustento.
"Colonia" Don Rafael Cepeda AtilesCoro  Colonia, colonia, lleva la caña al ingenio.Colonia, colonia, lleva la caña al ingenio.Versos  No dejes morir de hambre a los pobres;Te reciben sus salarios en la hacienda donde están muriendo.Si la caña no podemos, con que gana su sustento? Te lo suplico, coloca, que prepara a los obreros.